---
layout: post
title: JavaScript tail-call optimization decorator using exceptions
post_time: March  6 2013,  1:47 PM
---
JavaScript does not have [tail call optimization](http://paulbarry.com/articles/2009/08/30/tail-call-optimization),
at least until [proper tail calls](http://wiki.ecmascript.org/doku.php?id=harmony:proper_tail_calls) arrive in ES6,
because of the existence of <code>&lt;function&gt;.caller</code> and <code>&lt;function&gt;.callee</code>.
So, if you're doing something crazy like
[implementing the lambda calculus from first principles](https://github.com/krallja/language_sandbox/blob/js/rosalind/f.js),
you're gonna have a bad time.

Let's consider a really simple recursive Node.js module, recurse.js:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/krallja/5087328.js" id="recurseJS">
</script>

We can then test recurse.js to see how many stack frames it takes to crash Node:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/krallja/5087330.js" id="bisecdJS">
</script>

On my Linode, <code>node bisect.js recurse.js</code> prints:

    Bounds: 16000 32000
    16376
    39 'processes created'

16,376 should be enough stack frames for anyone.

Unless you're writing in a purely functional style, in which case recursion is the only way you can write a loop.

The way one usually gets out of this situation is by writing in 
<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tail_call#Through_trampolining">trampoline</a>
style. (You can rewrite your compiler or interpreter to automatically use trampoline style,
but V8 and Node.js are too big for me to consider it tonight.)

Instead of rewriting my functions, I just want to be able to call a decorator and have them trampoline
without manual rewriting.
JavaScript exceptions unwind the stack, and can be of any type. 
So let's just throw a continuation to the trampoline.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/krallja/5087331.js" id="throwJS">
</script>

**<code>throwup</code>** is the tail-call optimizing decorator around the original function; its return value
should overwrite the original variable name.
**<code>makecallable</code>** creates the trampoline in the form of a <code>try{...}catch{...}</code> statement.

Here's an example:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/krallja/5087433.js" id="tcoJS">
</script>

And another one, which uses corecursion:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/krallja/5095756.js">
</script>

I ran <code>node bisect.js tco.js</code> to measure when exception-based tail-call-optimization fails.
(I let it run to 32M before getting bored. (It took 2 minutes.))

The stack trace of the exception is allocated on the heap, so it cannot overflow the stack.

Trampolined functions must be called in tail position.
Throwing an exception will blow away the surrounding context.

How is performance?

**Comically bad.**

Here are the results of wrapping the calls to
<code>recurse</code> and <code>throwup(_recurse)</code> in <code>for(var i=0;i&lt;100000;i++)</code>:

<style type="text/css">#tcoGraph .domain { display: none }/* solid black is not a useful element */</style>
<div class='graph'>
    <h4 style="text-align: center">
        Execution time vs iteration size, looped 100,000 times
    </h4>
    <div id="tcoGraph" style="width:500px; height: 400px; padding: 10px; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; background-color: #fcfcfd;">
    </div>
    <div style="text-align: center">Iteration size</div>
    <ul style="float: right; margin-right: 60px;">
        <li style="color: red"><code>recurse</code></li>
        <li style="color: blue"><code>throwup</code></li>
    </ul>
</div>
<div style="clear: both">
</div>

<script>
(function(d3) {
    if(!d3) return;
    d3.json('/js-tco.json', function(data) { 
        function getColor(name) {
            return {"recurse100.js": "red", "tco100.js": "blue"}[name] || "black";
        }
        var series = data.reduce(function(p,c) {
            if(8 > c[1] ) return p;
            var my;
            for(var i in p)
                if(p[i].name == c[0])
                    my = p[i];
            if(typeof my == "undefined") {
                my = {name: c[0], data: [], color: getColor(c[0])};
                p.push(my);
            }
            my.data.push({x: c[1], y: c[2]});
            return p;
        }, []);
    
        var graph = new Rickshaw.Graph( {
            element: document.querySelector("#tcoGraph"),
            renderer: 'line',
            width: 490,
            height: 400,
            series: series
        });

        graph.render();
        var xAxis = new Rickshaw.Graph.Axis.X({
            graph: graph,
            tickFormat: function(y){ return (y/1000).toFixed(0) + "k"; }
        });
        xAxis.render();
        var yAxis = new Rickshaw.Graph.Axis.Y({
            graph: graph,
            tickFormat: function(x){ return (x/1000).toFixed(0) + "s"; }
        });
        yAxis.render();

    });
})(window.d3);
</script>

Henry Baker describes an [unpublished suggestion from Appel](http://home.pipeline.com/~hbaker1/CheneyMTA.html)
to have the compiler (in our case, <code>throwup()</code>) check the stack size and only return to
the trampoline if the stack is about to overflow. This method 
"avoids making a large number of small \[but slow\] trampoline bounces
by occasionally jumping off the Empire State Building."

Implementation is left to the reader. Don't forget your parachute!
